# SeqTech2019 
## CSHL 2019 Advanced Sequencing Technologies and Applications Course Materials

### Mapping your reads with Cellranger mkfastq
```bash
cellranger mkfastq \
	--localcores=12 \
	--run=$BCL \
	--samplesheet=$BASEDIR/SampleSheet.csv \
```

-------

These are the files produced by Cellranger mkfastq from a NextSeq500 sequencing run:

```bash
$ ls /path/to/fastqs/

SeqCourse2018-10XGEX-LPLard_S1_L001_I1_001.fastq.gz  SeqCourse2018-10XGEX-LPLard_S1_L003_I1_001.fastq.gz
SeqCourse2018-10XGEX-LPLard_S1_L001_R1_001.fastq.gz  SeqCourse2018-10XGEX-LPLard_S1_L003_R1_001.fastq.gz
SeqCourse2018-10XGEX-LPLard_S1_L001_R2_001.fastq.gz  SeqCourse2018-10XGEX-LPLard_S1_L003_R2_001.fastq.gz
SeqCourse2018-10XGEX-LPLard_S1_L002_I1_001.fastq.gz  SeqCourse2018-10XGEX-LPLard_S1_L004_I1_001.fastq.gz
SeqCourse2018-10XGEX-LPLard_S1_L002_R1_001.fastq.gz  SeqCourse2018-10XGEX-LPLard_S1_L004_R1_001.fastq.gz
SeqCourse2018-10XGEX-LPLard_S1_L002_R2_001.fastq.gz  SeqCourse2018-10XGEX-LPLard_S1_L004_R2_001.fastq.gz

```

-------


### ...I1... = 8bp Sample index read:
```bash
@NB551387:259:H25HLBGXC:1:11101:7081:1841 1:N:0:GTTGCAGC
GTTGCAGC
+
AAAAAEEE

```
These files contain the Sample Index read information.  Note that the Cellranger mkfastq pipeline also writes the error-corrected sample index into the name line of the corresponding R1 and R2 reads.  See below.  

-------

### ...R1... = Illumina Read 1.  This contains the cell barcode and UMI:
```bash
@NB551387:259:H25HLBGXC:1:11101:7081:1841 1:N:0:GTTGCAGC
CATCAAGGTCAGATAAGGTCGATCCGTT
+
AAAAAEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE/EEEEE<

```
In the most recent version of the chemistry, this will be a 28bp read. 
  * Bases 1-16: Cell Barcode
  * Bases 17-28: UMI

```bash
CATCAAGGTCAGATAAGGTCGATCCGTT
< Cell Barcode >
                <    UMI   >
```

The cell barcodes are only accepted if they are a close match to the curated list of possible barcodes generated by the synthesis chemistry. This list is buried within the Cellranger directory:

```bash
$ head -n 4 /path/to/CellRanger/cellranger-3.1.0/cellranger-cs/3.1.0/lib/python/cellranger/barcodes/chromium_whitelist_3M_2018.txt 
AAACCCAAGAAACACT
AAACCCAAGAAACCAT
AAACCCAAGAAACCCA
AAACCCAAGAAACCCG
```

-------



### ...R2... = Illumina Read 2.  This contains the gene body read (or Cell Hash / CITE-seq tags):

Our current sequencing method of choice is the NextSeq500 HighOutput SE75 flow cell.  These kits allow us to do 56 base pair reads for the gene body.  This is because the 75 cycle kit actually ships enough extra reagent to sequence the Illumina indices, plus a little more to spare.  In reality, we can squeeze out 92bp from a SE75 kit. 

**56 (gene body) + 28 (cell barcode / UMI) + 8 (Sample Index) = 92 bases**
 
```bash
@NB551387:259:H25HLBGXC:1:11101:7081:1841 2:N:0:GTTGCAGC
CTGCAAACCATCTCCTGTGCAGGGTCCTGCTGGCACCATGGTCTCACAGCCACCCG
+
A//AAEEE///EA<////</E/</EEAA/AA//EEE<<A<//EAA/6A/<EEEA</
```
Officially, 10X recommends quite long reads to map the gene body:

|Read	|Read 1	|i7 Index	|i5 Index	|Read 2|
|------------ |:------------:| -------:| -------:| --------:|
|Purpose	|Cell barcode & UMI	|Sample Index	|N/A	|Insert|
|Length	|28	|8	|0	|91|

**Note from 10X:**
* *Shorter transcript reads may lead to reduced transcriptome alignment rates. Cell barcode, UMI and Sample index reads must not be shorter than indicated. Any read can be longer than recommended. Additional bases in Sample index reads must be trimmed using cellranger mkfastq or Illumina's bcl2fastq prior to further analysis. Additional bases in Cell barcode or UMI reads will automatically be ignored by Cell Ranger 1.3 or later.* *

-------

### Primary data analysis with Cellranger Count 

For each sample in your experiment, you'll need to run `cellranger count`.  

`cellranger count` will map the reads to the reference genome that you specify and count digital gene expression according to the transcriptome model that was used during building of the reference.  In most cases, we use the pre-built references for the [human and mouse genomes provided by 10X:](https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/software/downloads/latest)

`cellranger count` is widely used to generate the primary count table, and has become a de facto standard despite there being a few alternatives.  It requires a linux machine with 8GB memory per CPU (to hold the human reference genome in memory), and is quite astoundingly slow and prone to crashing.  Mapping and counting a single sample typically takes 4-8 hours on a single multi-core node with 12-16 CPU cores and 128GB memory. 

If you have a HPC cluster for distributed computing, good for you.  You'll probably get to know your sysadmin really well as you repeatedly crash jobs, hog memory, and wreak havoc on your HPC cluster.  

Unfortunately, Cellranger is still the best option for generating a robust, industry-standard count matrix plus easily shareable results files and a handsome QC summary HTML page.  If you are a power user and simply want an accurate count matrix as quickly as possible, consider switching to [STAR](https://github.com/alexdobin/STAR).  Cellranger actually relies on an older verion of STAR for the basic transcript alignment, but the newest versions of STAR supports generating count matrices from single cell libraries such as 10X Genomics, or any custom barcoding format of your own design.  You won't get the nice shareable Loupe file, but you will get your data after lunch instead of tomorrow morning.  

Here is how to run Cellranger in local mode, if you have only a single workstation computer or if you want to restrict the run to a single node on your cluster.  I find this is slow but reliable:

```bash
#!/bin/sh

SAMPLE=SeqCourse2018-10XGEX-LPLard
TRANSCRIPTOME=/path/to/transcriptome/folder/


cellranger count \
  --id=$SAMPLE \
  --jobmode=local \
  --localcores=12 \
  --transcriptome=$TRANSCRIPTOME \
	--fastqs=/path/to/folder/containing/your/fastqs/ \
	--sample=$SAMPLE \
  
  ```
  In the FASTQ example above, the sample ID used was:
  ```bash
  SeqCourse2018-10XGEX-LPLard
  ```
`cellranger count` will search through your FASTQ folders to find files whose names match this sample ID.  If you ran multiple flowcells and wish to combine the data for additional depth, provide two paths to each fastq folder,separated by a comma with no spaces:
  
```bash
  	--fastqs=/path/to/fastq/folder1/,/path/to/fastq/folder2/
```
Make sure you used the same sample ID when preparing the fastq file from both flowcells.
  
   
